README.md, before:

[main](/Molmed/snpseq_metadata/tree/main) | [dev](/Molmed/snpseq_metadata/tree/dev)
--- | ---
[![Build Status](https://app.travis-ci.com/Molmed/snpseq_metadata.svg?branch=main)](https://app.travis-ci.com/Molmed/snpseq_metadata) | [![Build Status](https://app.travis-ci.com/Molmed/snpseq_metadata.svg?branch=dev)](https://app.travis-ci.com/Molmed/snpseq_metadata)

# snpseq_metadata

This is a Python project that allows parsing of metadata associated with sequencing projects and export to various formats.

## Prerequisites

- Python 3.7 or greater
- [xsdata](https://xsdata.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)

## Installation
Clone the repo to your local machine and deploy the code
```
git clone https://github.com/Molmed/snpseq_metadata && cd snpseq_metadata
pip install -r requirements.txt -e .
```
Download the [ENA/SRA XML schema](#enasra-xml-schema) and generate python models (can be skipped if these are already available)
``` 
bash snpseq_metadata/scripts/generate_python_models.sh xsdata
```

## Docker

You can also build a docker image using the supplied Dockerfile:

```
docker build -t snpseq_metadata .
docker run -v /path/to/host/folder:/mnt/metadata snpseq_metadata snpseq_metadata --help
```

## Usage

The main command is `snpseq_metadata` and it offers a number of subcommands. Running without arguments will display the usage help:
```
$ snpseq_metadata
Usage: snpseq_metadata [OPTIONS] COMMAND [ARGS]...

Options:
  --help  Show this message and exit.

Commands:
  export
  extract
```

### extract
The `extract` subcommand is used to parse a runfolder from disk and extract the metadata, or parse data from
 the [snpseq_data](https://gitlab.snpseq.medsci.uu.se/shared/snpseq-data) service and export to the specified format:
```
$ snpseq_metadata extract --help
Usage: snpseq_metadata extract [OPTIONS] COMMAND [ARGS]...

Options:
  --help  Show this message and exit.

Commands:
  runfolder
  snpseq-data
```
#### runfolder
The `runfolder` subcommand is used to parse a runfolder from disk, extract the necessary metadata and export to the
specified format.
```
$ snpseq_metadata extract runfolder --help
Usage: snpseq_metadata extract runfolder [OPTIONS] RUNFOLDER_PATH COMMAND1
                                         [ARGS]... [COMMAND2 [ARGS]...]...

Options:
  -o, --outdir PATH  [default: current working directory]
  --help             Show this message and exit.

Commands:
  json
```
Here, `RUNFOLDER_PATH` is the path to the sequencing runfolder for which metadata should be exported.
Some test data are available under `tests/resources` and extracting metadata to json can be accomplished by:
```
$ snpseq_metadata extract runfolder \
  -o /tmp/ \
  tests/resources/210415_A00001_0123_BXYZ321XY
  json
```
This will parse the runfolder into the python NGI models and serialize the models to json, saved under the specified
output directory:
```
/tmp
└── 210415_A00001_0123_BXYZ321XY.ngi.json
```

#### snpseq-data
The `snpseq-data` subcommand is used to parse data exported from the
[snpseq_data](https://gitlab.snpseq.medsci.uu.se/shared/snpseq-data) service and export to the specified format.
```
$ snpseq_metadata extract snpseq-data --help
Usage: snpseq_metadata extract snpseq-data [OPTIONS] SNPSEQ_DATA_FILE COMMAND1
                                           [ARGS]... [COMMAND2 [ARGS]...]...

Options:
  -o, --outdir PATH  [default: current working directory]
  --help             Show this message and exit.

Commands:
  json
```
Here, `SNPSEQ_DATA_FILE` is the path to a json-file containing metadata for a flowcell obtained from the
[snpseq_data](https://gitlab.snpseq.medsci.uu.se/shared/snpseq-data) service. Some test data are available under
`tests/resources` and extracting metadata to json can be accomplished by:
```
$ snpseq_metadata extract snpseq-data \
  -o /tmp/ \
  tests/resources/snpseq_data_XYZ321XY.json
  json
```
This will parse the metadata into the python NGI models and serialize the models to json, saved under the specified
output directory:
```
/tmp
└── /snpseq_data_XYZ321XY.ngi.json
```

### export

The `export` subcommand is used to parse the extracted NGI model metadata from json into python SRA models and
serialize the models into the specified formats:
```
$ snpseq_metadata export
Usage: snpseq_metadata export [OPTIONS] RUNFOLDER_DATA SNPSEQ_DATA COMMAND1
                              [ARGS]... [COMMAND2 [ARGS]...]...

Options:
  -o, --outdir PATH  [default: current working directory]
  --help             Show this message and exit.

Commands:
  json
  manifest
  xml
```

Here, `RUNFOLDER_DATA` is the path to a json file with serialized NGI runfolder metadata (created with the
`extract runfolder` subcommand above), for which metadata should be exported and `SNPSEQ_DATA` is the path to a
json-file with serialized NGI experiment metadata (created with the `extract snpseq-data` subcommand above).

Some test data are available under `tests/resources` and exporting metadata compatible with the SRA XML submission
format and also to a human-friendly manifest (compatible with SRA submissions) can be accomplished by:

```
$ snpseq_metadata export \
  -o /tmp/ \
  tests/resources/210415_A00001_0123_BXYZ321XY.ngi.json \
  tests/resources/snpseq_data_XYZ321XY.ngi.json \
  xml manifest
```
For each unique project, this will export a pair of XML-files representing metadata for the RUN and EXPERIMENT objects
and one manifest file for each unique experiment. For the test data set, the command above will create:
```
/tmp/
├── AB-1234-experiment.xml
├── AB-1234-run.xml
├── CD-5678-experiment.xml
├── CD-5678-run.xml
├── EF-9012-experiment.xml
├── EF-9012-run.xml
├── AB-1234-Sample_AB-1234-SampleA-1-NovaSeq.manifest
├── AB-1234-Sample_AB-1234-SampleA-2-NovaSeq.manifest
├── AB-1234-Sample_AB-1234-SampleB-NovaSeq.manifest
├── CD-5678-CD-5678-SampleA-1-NovaSeq.manifest
├── CD-5678-CD-5678-SampleA-2-NovaSeq.manifest
└── CD-5678-CD-5678-SampleB-NovaSeq.manifest
```
## Test data
As mentioned above, test data is available under `tests/resources` and the package include a pytest suite that can be
run with 
```
pytest tests/
``` 
In addition, a python script for validating a XML file against an XSD schema is provided:
```
$ python tests/validate_xml_file.py --help
Usage: validate_xml_file.py [OPTIONS] XML_FILE XSD_FILE

Options:
  --help  Show this message and exit.
```
For integration tests, a bash script is provided which runs through the test data and validates the generated XML files
against the corresponding schema:
```
bash tests/validate_test_data.sh $(pwd) /tmp/test_output
```
## Package structure
The code is built around the concept of having a set of classes represent metadata and provide internal logic,
functionality for serializing and de-serializing etc. Such a set of classes can then represent metadata from a specific
source (e.g. LIMS, NGI, SRA) and are collected as a separate module under `snpseq_metadata/models/[source]_models`.

A conversion layer that provide functionality to convert between metadata models is provided in
`snpseq_metadata/models/converter.py`, with the help of library mappings from NGI to SRA terminologies in
`snpseq_metadata/models/ngi_to_sra_library_mapping.py`.

### ENA/SRA XML schema
[ENA/SRA](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/home) provide 
[XML schema](ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/ena/doc/xsd/sra_1_5/) (in XSD format), specifying the format for the 
metadata XML files used for 
[programmatic submission](https://ena-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/submit/general-guide/programmatic.html) of raw 
sequences to the repository.
 
### xsdata
The [xsdata](https://xsdata.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) library was used to create python dataclasses from the XML
schemas provided by SRA. These dataclasses are used to export the modeled metadata into XML format, corresponding to
the SRA schemas. The `snpseq_metadata` package contains wrappers around the dataclasses and functionality for
converting between different data models.

This is the typical command for creating the python dataclasses for the XML schema files located in `resources/schema`
using xsdata:
```
$ cd snpseq_metadata/models && \
  xsdata generate \
    -p xsdata ../../resources/schema
```

### NGI to SRA library mapping
The SRA model have a terminology for
[Library selection](https://ena-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/submit/reads/webin-cli.html#permitted-values-for-library-selection),
[Library source](https://ena-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/submit/reads/webin-cli.html#permitted-values-for-library-source) and
[Library strategy](https://ena-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/submit/reads/webin-cli.html#permitted-values-for-library-strategy) that
is not directly translatable from the fields stored in e.g. Clarity LIMS. Therefore, the file
`snpseq_metadata/models/ngi_to_sra_library_mapping.py` contains functionality for mapping the NGI terminology to the SRA
terminology.

To add a new mapping for a application, sample type and sample prep kit, create a class that is a subclass of
`ApplicationSampleTypeMapping` and has class variables
```
ngi_application
ngi_sample_type
ngi_sample_prep_kit
```
containing the possible values (in lower case) stored in Clarity LIMS. Use the class variables
```
sra_library_strategy
sra_library_source
sra_library_source
```
to specify the corresponding SRA values.
Here is an example for bisulfite sequencing libraries:
```
class Bisulphite(ApplicationSampleTypeMapping):
    """
    Bisulphite sequencing
    """

    ngi_application = "epigenetics"
    ngi_sample_type = "gdna"
    ngi_sample_prep_kit = ["splat", "nebnext enzymatic methyl-seq kit"]

    sra_library_strategy = TypeLibraryStrategy.BISULFITE_SEQ
    sra_library_source = TypeLibrarySource.GENOMIC
    sra_library_selection = TypeLibrarySelection.RANDOM

```
The `ApplicationSampleTypeMapping` class contains logic for finding the
correct mapping from a NGI model. If needed, this logic can be overridden in the subclass.

Commit message:

Develop (#14)
* Develop 2143 run unit tests (#11)

* Run unit tests on git push

* Add integration tests in CI/CD

* Delete travis file

* Run tests with docker

* update xsdata version, fix deprecated references

* use common context and config for serialization
add custom json parser to handle ambiguous bindings

* switch to pyproject.toml
ignore schema metadata in tests

* include workflow branches

* added converter exception subclasses

---------

Co-authored-by: Edvard Englund <edvard.englund@medsci.uu.se>

README.md, after:


[![Run unit tests](https://github.com/b97pla/snpseq_metadata/actions/workflows/run-unit-tests.yml/badge.svg?event=push)](https://github.com/b97pla/snpseq_metadata/actions/workflows/run-unit-tests.yml)

# snpseq_metadata

This is a Python project that allows parsing of metadata associated with sequencing projects and export to various formats.

## Prerequisites

- Python 3.7 or greater
- [xsdata](https://xsdata.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)

## Installation
Clone the repo to your local machine and deploy the code
```
git clone https://github.com/Molmed/snpseq_metadata && cd snpseq_metadata
python3 -m venv --upgrade-deps .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install .
```
Download the [ENA/SRA XML schema](#enasra-xml-schema) and generate python models (can be skipped if these are already available)
``` 
generate_python_models.sh xsdata
```

## Docker

You can also build a docker image using the supplied Dockerfile:

```
docker build -t snpseq_metadata .
docker run -v /path/to/host/folder:/mnt/metadata snpseq_metadata snpseq_metadata --help
```

## Usage

The main command is `snpseq_metadata` and it offers a number of subcommands. Running without arguments will display the usage help:
```
$ snpseq_metadata
Usage: snpseq_metadata [OPTIONS] COMMAND [ARGS]...

Options:
  --help  Show this message and exit.

Commands:
  export
  extract
```

### extract
The `extract` subcommand is used to parse a runfolder from disk and extract the metadata, or parse data from
 the [snpseq_data](https://gitlab.snpseq.medsci.uu.se/shared/snpseq-data) service and export to the specified format:
```
$ snpseq_metadata extract --help
Usage: snpseq_metadata extract [OPTIONS] COMMAND [ARGS]...

Options:
  --help  Show this message and exit.

Commands:
  runfolder
  snpseq-data
```
#### runfolder
The `runfolder` subcommand is used to parse a runfolder from disk, extract the necessary metadata and export to the
specified format.
```
$ snpseq_metadata extract runfolder --help
Usage: snpseq_metadata extract runfolder [OPTIONS] RUNFOLDER_PATH COMMAND1
                                         [ARGS]... [COMMAND2 [ARGS]...]...

Options:
  -o, --outdir PATH  [default: current working directory]
  --help             Show this message and exit.

Commands:
  json
```
Here, `RUNFOLDER_PATH` is the path to the sequencing runfolder for which metadata should be exported.
Some test data are available under `tests/resources` and extracting metadata to json can be accomplished by:
```
$ snpseq_metadata extract runfolder \
  -o /tmp/ \
  tests/resources/210415_A00001_0123_BXYZ321XY
  json
```
This will parse the runfolder into the python NGI models and serialize the models to json, saved under the specified
output directory:
```
/tmp
└── 210415_A00001_0123_BXYZ321XY.ngi.json
```

#### snpseq-data
The `snpseq-data` subcommand is used to parse data exported from the
[snpseq_data](https://gitlab.snpseq.medsci.uu.se/shared/snpseq-data) service and export to the specified format.
```
$ snpseq_metadata extract snpseq-data --help
Usage: snpseq_metadata extract snpseq-data [OPTIONS] SNPSEQ_DATA_FILE COMMAND1
                                           [ARGS]... [COMMAND2 [ARGS]...]...

Options:
  -o, --outdir PATH  [default: current working directory]
  --help             Show this message and exit.

Commands:
  json
```
Here, `SNPSEQ_DATA_FILE` is the path to a json-file containing metadata for a flowcell obtained from the
[snpseq_data](https://gitlab.snpseq.medsci.uu.se/shared/snpseq-data) service. Some test data are available under
`tests/resources` and extracting metadata to json can be accomplished by:
```
$ snpseq_metadata extract snpseq-data \
  -o /tmp/ \
  tests/resources/snpseq_data_XYZ321XY.json
  json
```
This will parse the metadata into the python NGI models and serialize the models to json, saved under the specified
output directory:
```
/tmp
└── /snpseq_data_XYZ321XY.ngi.json
```

### export

The `export` subcommand is used to parse the extracted NGI model metadata from json into python SRA models and
serialize the models into the specified formats:
```
$ snpseq_metadata export
Usage: snpseq_metadata export [OPTIONS] RUNFOLDER_DATA SNPSEQ_DATA COMMAND1
                              [ARGS]... [COMMAND2 [ARGS]...]...

Options:
  -o, --outdir PATH  [default: current working directory]
  --help             Show this message and exit.

Commands:
  json
  manifest
  xml
```

Here, `RUNFOLDER_DATA` is the path to a json file with serialized NGI runfolder metadata (created with the
`extract runfolder` subcommand above), for which metadata should be exported and `SNPSEQ_DATA` is the path to a
json-file with serialized NGI experiment metadata (created with the `extract snpseq-data` subcommand above).

Some test data are available under `tests/resources` and exporting metadata compatible with the SRA XML submission
format and also to a human-friendly manifest (compatible with SRA submissions) can be accomplished by:

```
$ snpseq_metadata export \
  -o /tmp/ \
  tests/resources/210415_A00001_0123_BXYZ321XY.ngi.json \
  tests/resources/snpseq_data_XYZ321XY.ngi.json \
  xml manifest
```
For each unique project, this will export a pair of XML-files representing metadata for the RUN and EXPERIMENT objects
and one manifest file for each unique experiment. For the test data set, the command above will create:
```
/tmp/
├── AB-1234-experiment.xml
├── AB-1234-run.xml
├── CD-5678-experiment.xml
├── CD-5678-run.xml
├── EF-9012-experiment.xml
├── EF-9012-run.xml
├── AB-1234-Sample_AB-1234-SampleA-1-NovaSeq.manifest
├── AB-1234-Sample_AB-1234-SampleA-2-NovaSeq.manifest
├── AB-1234-Sample_AB-1234-SampleB-NovaSeq.manifest
├── CD-5678-CD-5678-SampleA-1-NovaSeq.manifest
├── CD-5678-CD-5678-SampleA-2-NovaSeq.manifest
└── CD-5678-CD-5678-SampleB-NovaSeq.manifest
```
## Test data
As mentioned above, test data is available under `tests/resources` and the package include a pytest suite.
If not already installed, first install the test dependencies:
```
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install .[test]
```
Then the test suite can be run with 
```
pytest tests/
``` 
In addition, a python script for validating a XML file against an XSD schema is provided:
```
$ python tests/validate_xml_file.py --help
Usage: validate_xml_file.py [OPTIONS] XML_FILE XSD_FILE

Options:
  --help  Show this message and exit.
```
For integration tests, a bash script is provided which runs through the test data and validates the generated XML files
against the corresponding schema:
```
bash tests/validate_test_data.sh $(pwd) /tmp/test_output
```
## Package structure
The code is built around the concept of having a set of classes represent metadata and provide internal logic,
functionality for serializing and de-serializing etc. Such a set of classes can then represent metadata from a specific
source (e.g. LIMS, NGI, SRA) and are collected as a separate module under `snpseq_metadata/models/[source]_models`.

A conversion layer that provide functionality to convert between metadata models is provided in
`snpseq_metadata/models/converter.py`, with the help of library mappings from NGI to SRA terminologies in
`snpseq_metadata/models/ngi_to_sra_library_mapping.py`.

### ENA/SRA XML schema
[ENA/SRA](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/home) provide 
[XML schema](ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/ena/doc/xsd/sra_1_5/) (in XSD format), specifying the format for the 
metadata XML files used for 
[programmatic submission](https://ena-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/submit/general-guide/programmatic.html) of raw 
sequences to the repository.
 
### xsdata
The [xsdata](https://xsdata.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) library was used to create python dataclasses from the XML
schemas provided by SRA. These dataclasses are used to export the modeled metadata into XML format, corresponding to
the SRA schemas. The `snpseq_metadata` package contains wrappers around the dataclasses and functionality for
converting between different data models.

This is the typical command for creating the python dataclasses for the XML schema files located in `resources/schema`
using xsdata:
```
$ cd snpseq_metadata/models && \
  xsdata generate \
    -p xsdata ../../resources/schema
```

### NGI to SRA library mapping
The SRA model have a terminology for
[Library selection](https://ena-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/submit/reads/webin-cli.html#permitted-values-for-library-selection),
[Library source](https://ena-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/submit/reads/webin-cli.html#permitted-values-for-library-source) and
[Library strategy](https://ena-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/submit/reads/webin-cli.html#permitted-values-for-library-strategy) that
is not directly translatable from the fields stored in e.g. Clarity LIMS. Therefore, the file
`snpseq_metadata/models/ngi_to_sra_library_mapping.py` contains functionality for mapping the NGI terminology to the SRA
terminology.

To add a new mapping for a application, sample type and sample prep kit, create a class that is a subclass of
`ApplicationSampleTypeMapping` and has class variables
```
ngi_application
ngi_sample_type
ngi_sample_prep_kit
```
containing the possible values (in lower case) stored in Clarity LIMS. Use the class variables
```
sra_library_strategy
sra_library_source
sra_library_source
```
to specify the corresponding SRA values.
Here is an example for bisulfite sequencing libraries:
```
class Bisulphite(ApplicationSampleTypeMapping):
    """
    Bisulphite sequencing
    """

    ngi_application = "epigenetics"
    ngi_sample_type = "gdna"
    ngi_sample_prep_kit = ["splat", "nebnext enzymatic methyl-seq kit"]

    sra_library_strategy = TypeLibraryStrategy.BISULFITE_SEQ
    sra_library_source = TypeLibrarySource.GENOMIC
    sra_library_selection = TypeLibrarySelection.RANDOM

```
The `ApplicationSampleTypeMapping` class contains logic for finding the
correct mapping from a NGI model. If needed, this logic can be overridden in the subclass.
